
      LaTeX installation instructions for TrueTeX for Windows 95/98/NT

                               19 February 1999
                           (Revised 31 August 2001)

SUMMARY
=======

This file (truetex.txt) is part of the LaTeX distribution, and contains
instructions on how to install LaTeX with TrueTeX for Windows 95/98/NT.

Since the TrueTeX distribution includes all of the base LaTeX macros, you
should be installing another LaTeX base distribution only to update the LaTeX
base macros.  In fact, you may find it more convenient to simply order and
install the lastest TrueTeX update when you want the latest LaTeX; that way
you can get the freshest TrueTeX *and* LaTeX software with the ease and
security of TrueTeX automatic installation.

Before reading this file, you should review install.txt from the LaTeX
distribution, which will explain how the LaTeX installation works in general.
TrueTeX introduces very few exceptions to that generic process.

This file describes the following, specifically for TrueTeX:

  * How to create the LaTeX format.

  * How to install the LaTeX files.

  * What to do if you have any problems.

REQUIREMENTS
============

In addition to the LaTeX distribution files, you will also need the file
"hyphen.tex" (English hyphenation) and the .tfm (TeX font metric) files, which
are included in the TrueTeX distribution and should already be installed.

CONFIGURING LATEX
=================

TrueTeX is carefully designed and implemented to bring the widest
compatibility with TeX and LaTeX to the Windows environment.  We have included
features like virtual fonts and recursive directory searching that many other
implementations omit.  The luxury of Windows virtual memory and the voluptuous
allowances in TrueTeX remove the constraints implied by the old TeX memory
limitations.

The Unix-style configuration to which the LaTeX distribution defaults is
appropriate and compatible with TrueTeX.  TrueTeX does not require any special
configuration to run LaTeX, such as a texsys.cfg file.

Note that the earlier releases of TrueTeX used the directory \TrueTeX\macros
for both plain TeX and LaTeX base macros.  Later releases (4.1D and later)
use the standard TeX directory structure (TDS) directory
\TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base.  All of the instructions below assume you are using
the directory \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base for the LaTeX base macros, and you
should substitute the appropriate directory if you have an older release or a
different starting directory.

The availability of non-English hyphenation in LaTeX is controlled by a
configuration file hyphen.cfg, which you can create to alter the LaTeX
defaults.  Creating such a file is explained elsewhere in the LaTeX
distribution, and in references such as _The LaTeX Companion_.  If you want to
configure LaTeX for non-English hyphenation, we suggest that you create a
bi-lingual hyphenation configuration, with language 0 (the default) as
English, which will provide compatibility with the LaTeX documentation files,
which are written in English.

SAVING YOUR OLD VERSION OF LaTeX
================================

There are several techniques for retaining the older version of LaTeX.
Usually, the only compelling reason to do so is to insure against trouble with
a failed installation of the new version.  If you are brave and reckless,
you can just wipe the old files and start over with the new distribution.

However, for the more conservative and cautious, if you're not concerned with
being able to actually run the old version in parallel with the new, then we
recommend you create a zip archive of the old macro and format files and then
delete the unzipped versions.  Another easy technique which leaves the old
version readily accessible is to rename a subdirectory of the base directory,
for example renaming \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base to \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\oldbase or
\TrueTeX\TeX\oldLaTeX\base; then re-creating the \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
directory to receive the new installation.

In either case, once you are satisfied that the new LaTeX is working and
complete, you have already separated the old version and made it easy to
delete.

UNPACKING THE DISTRIBUTION
==========================

The LaTeX project authors publish their work as a set of distribution files
named with a .ins ("install") extension.  Each such distribution file combines
the macros and documentation for a component of LaTeX.  Your first step in
installing LaTeX is to unpack these install-files, thereby creating more
compact versions (having the documentation stripped out).

The unpacking method is unusual: To unpack the LaTeX distribution files, you
run iniTeX (not LaTeX or plain TeX) on unpack.ins, which has a side effect of
writing out a large set of files that make up the LaTeX macros.  The procedure
is as follows, running the TrueTeX formatter as iniTeX:

   *  Launch the TrueTeX formatter.  Select "Cancel" on the file-open
      dialog if that dialog appears.

   *  Select "Preload" (which might read "Preload=latex" or some other
      preloaded format name) from the menu bar.

   *  Observe the "Select Preloaded Format File" dialog.  Select "Default"
      (which indicates you want no file preloaded) and "OK".  The "Preload"
      item on the menu bar should now read simply "Preload".

   *  Select File + Open, navigate to the directory where you have placed the
      LaTeX distribution files, and type in the filename you want to
      format, namely unpack.ins in this case.

   *  Select "Go" to begin the formatting.  The formatter window will close
      after it finishes, and you can examine the file unpack.log to examine
      the messages that might have scrolled by too quickly for you to read.

   This does not generate a format file; the instructions in the next section
   create the LaTeX format file.

CREATING THE LaTeX FORMAT
=========================

To create the LaTeX format file (latex.fmt) for TrueTeX, run iniTeX on
latex.ltx.  The procedure using TrueTeX is as follows:

   *  Follow the steps in the previous section to launch the TrueTeX
      formatter and select no preloaded format file; except on the last
      step, select latex.ltx as the file in the File Open dialog.  This
      will generate the format file latex.fmt and close the formatter
      window.

   *  Move the file latex.fmt to the TrueTeX formats directory.  Normally this
      is c:\truetex\formats (in TrueTeX releases up to and including 4.1C) or
      c:\truetex\truetex (in later releases).  The drive and top directory
      will be different if you chose to install TrueTeX in a different
      directory than the default c:\truetex during TrueTeX installation.

PUTTING THE FILES WHERE LaTeX CAN READ THEM
===========================================

Use the following console commands to copy the LaTeX files (which are now
unpacked) to the appropriate inputs directory for TrueTeX (you may want to
paste the following lines into a batch file and run them that way instead of
typing them yourself):

      copy latexbug.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy testpage.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy lablst.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy idx.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy nfssfont.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy small2e.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy sample2e.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy docstrip.tex \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy *.cls \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy *.clo \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy *.sty \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy *.fd \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy *.def \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy *.cfg \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base
      copy *.ist \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base

   Note: the LaTeX base directory is \truetex\macros instead of
   \TrueTeX\TeX\LaTeX\base in TrueTeX releases 4.1C and earlier.

CHECKING THAT THE INSTALLATION WORKED
=====================================

You now have a new working LaTeX installed.  If you had a LaTeX icon
specifying "&latex" in the command-line as an option, it should automatically
use the new LaTeX.  You should also be able to select the preloaded format
latex.fmt using the Preload item in the formatter menu by selecting the Search
button.

Launch LaTeX and format the file ltxcheck.tex from the LaTeX distribution.
This will produce some `OK' and the following `BAD' warnings, which you can
ignore:

      "article.cls appears to be in current directory! ...  ! BAD: This file
      should not be run in a `standard input directory'."

   EXPLANATION: If article.cls is not in the current directory (that is, the
   directory where you navigated to open ltxcheck.lts) this can be a false
   alarm, due to the fact that LaTeX is not aware that the TrueTeX formatter
   (release 4.1C or earlier) did path-searching for input files, even if when
   file names indicated the current directory.  This lack of awareness does
   not affect normal operation of LaTeX.  If you are running release 4.1D or
   later of the formatter, you should not see this message, unless article.cls
   is indeed in the current directory.  If you really want to know where the
   formatter is finding the file article.cls, select "Debug+Show File Opens"
   and run the format of ltxcheck.ltx again.

      "! BAD: No ec fonts found!! ...  LaTeX does not require the use of ec
      fonts however they are strongly recommended."

                                    - or -

      "! BAD dc fonts 1.2 or older installed.
      Current (as of 1997/01/14) dc font release is 1.3.
      These dc fonts may be obtained from CTAN archives, in:
      tex-archive/fonts/dc.
      They are expected to be replaced by ec fonts very soon."

   EXPLANATION: TrueTeX does not supply the dc fonts release 1.2 or the ec
   fonts, although a dc fonts release 1.1 is available.  Regrettably, the
   later releases of the METAFONT bitmap fonts were re-designed such that the
   font name is used to indicate the font's optical scaling, which is an
   irrational scheme generally incompatible with scalable font technology such
   as is used in TrueType or ATM.  (Later releases multiplied optical sizes to
   the point that lately there are over 500 EC fonts, which is an impossible
   amount of effort to convert to scalable form or to reliably install in
   Windows.) If you want to use the TrueTeX dc fonts release 1.1,  run the
   olddc.ins through initex and move the resulting files to the TrueTeX inputs
   directory.

      "The LaTeX2e installation has installed fd files for release 1.2 (or
      later) of the dc fonts.  However, you appear to have only release 1.1 of
      these fonts.  You must now generate the correct fd files by running:
      latex olddc.ins and then rebuild the format by rerunning: initex
      latex.ltx ... ! BAD LaTeX2e system!!."

   EXPLANATION: You no doubt forgot to run olddc.ins through iniTeX before
   generating the LaTeX format file.

      "The fd files for the obsolete release 1.1 of the
      dc fonts have been loaded into the LaTeX format.
      However, you appear to have at least release 1.2 of the dc fonts.
      You should generate suitable fd files by running ..."

   EXPLANATION: You probably have the DC 1.2 metric files (*.tfm's, which is
   all ltxcheck.ltx is looking for) from some other source.  But you won't
   have the actual TrueType fonts (not from TrueTeX, anyway; they don't exist,
   at least not yet).  Leave the selection of the release 1.1 names in place;
   *don't* take the advice to "generate suitable fd files".

PROBLEMS
========

If you get error messages regarding missing fonts lcircle10 and lcirclew10,
use the Winodws 95/98/NT console to copy the 8-character names to the longer
names:

      cd \truetex\fonts
      copy lcircle1.tfm lcircle10.tfm
      copy lcirclw1.tfm lcirclew10.tfm

You may report additional problems installing LaTeX with TrueTeX to the
publisher's e-mail address given in the "About" dialog of either the TrueTeX
formatter or previewer, which as of this writing is: kinch@truetex.com.

CLEARING UP
===========

Consult the install.txt instructions for removing unneeded LaTeX distribution
files.

     --- Copyright 1997, 1999 Richard J Kinch and the LaTeX3 project ---
     ---                     All rights reserved.                    ---
