% Copyright (C) 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 Moreno Marzolla
%
% This file is part of the queueing toolbox, a Queueing Networks analysis
% package for GNU Octave
%
% The queueing toolbox is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
% it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
% Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at
% your option) any later version.
% 
% The queueing toolbox is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
% WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
% FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
% for more details.
% 
% You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
% along with the queueing toolbox; see the file COPYING.  If not, see
% <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

% This info file is take from the GNU Octave info file

\input texinfo
@setfilename queueing.info

@c The following macro is used for the on-line help system, but we don't
@c want lots of `See also: foo, bar, and baz' strings cluttering the
@c printed manual (that information should be in the supporting text for
@c each group of functions and variables).

@macro seealso {args}
@iftex
@vskip 2pt
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@sp 1
@end ifnottex
@noindent
@strong{See also:} \args\.
@end macro

@c @macro examplefile{file}
@c @example
@c @group
@c @verbatiminclude @value{top_srcdir}/examples/\file\
@c @end group
@c @end example
@c @end macro

@c @macro GETHELP{file}

@c @end macro

@c @macro GETDEMO{file,n}

@c @end macro

@c FIXME: The following macros are workaround to fix erratic behavior of texinfo
@iftex
@macro lambdack
@lambda_{c,k}
@end macro
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro lambda
lambda
@end macro
@macro lambdack
lambda_@{c, k@}
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* queueing: (octave).	Queueing Networks and Markov chains analysis package.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@c Settings for printing on 8-1/2 by 11 inch paper:
@c -----------------------------------------------

@setchapternewpage odd

@c Settings for small book format:
@c ------------------------------

@ignore
@smallbook
@setchapternewpage odd
@finalout
@iftex
@cropmarks
@end iftex
@end ignore

@defindex op
@defindex au

@c Things like the Octave version number are defined in conf.texi.
@c This file doesn't include a chapter, so it must not be included
@c if you want to run the Emacs function texinfo-multiple-files-update.

@include conf.texi

@settitle queueing
@documentdescription
User manual for the queueing toolbox, a GNU Octave package for queueing networks and Markov chains analysis. This package supports single-station queueing systems, queueing networks and Markov chains. The queueing toolbox implements, among others, the Mean Value Analysis (MVA) and convolution algorithms for product-form queueing networks. Transient and steady-state analysis of Markov chains is also implemented.
@end documentdescription

@ifnottex

Copyright @copyright{} 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 Moreno Marzolla.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions.
@end ifnottex

@titlepage
@title The Octave Queueing Toolbox
@subtitle User's Guide, Edition 1 for release @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{VERSIONDATE}
@author Moreno Marzolla
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 Moreno Marzolla (@email{marzolla@@cs.unibo.it}).

This is the first edition of the Queueing Toolbox documentation, and
is consistent with version @value{VERSION} of the package.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the same conditions as for modified versions.

Portions of this document have been adapted from the @code{octave}
manual, Copyright @copyright{} John W. Eaton.
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top

This manual documents how to install and run the Queueing Toolbox.
It corresponds to version @value{VERSION} of the package.
@end ifnottex

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Summary::
* Installation and Getting Started:: Installation of the queueing toolbox.
* Markov Chains::               Functions for Markov Chains.
* Single Station Queueing Systems:: Functions for single-station queueing systems.
* Queueing Networks::           Functions for queueing networks.
* References::                  References
* Copying::                     The GNU General Public License.
* Concept Index::               An item for each concept.
* Function Index::              An item for each function.
* Author Index::                An item for each author.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@include summary.texi
@include installation.texi
@include markovchains.texi
@include singlestation.texi
@include queueingnetworks.texi
@include references.texi

@c
@c Appendix starts here
@c
@include gpl.texi

@c
@c INDEX
@c

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index

@printindex fn

@node Author Index
@unnumbered Author Index

@printindex au

@bye
